Added useful details on Matrix vs. Telegram and Matrix vs. Discord (#10)
austinhuang0131/joinmatrix: guide/matrix-vs-discord.md

In the scope of this guide, the key reasons to move from Discord to Matrix are:

> * **Lack of privacy for private communications**, as private conversations are not only unencrypted, but also actively scanned (scope of which depends on your settings, but some happen even when you disable all the filtering-related toggles). People reported their messages were substituted with cooking recipes when they tried to send something that is considered a virus by Discord.

Reviewer: > People reported their messages were substituted with cooking recipes when they tried to send something that is considered a virus by Discord.

source

Author: https://twitter.com/Ashfire908/status/1021266005664780289 reports a bug on that very error message.

Reviewer: I don't think the messages are substituted, and also it's quite old... Is that still the case now?

Author: Yes, it still is. My friends have tried it a few weeks ago and it is still the case. And guess what, links in those substituted messages broke again...

Reviewer 2: > I don't think the messages are substituted, and also it's quite old... Is that still the case now?

I have personally seen it happen so i can confirm it does happen.

* Discord has made **decisions against the users' best interests**, with the most recent ones being:
  * Biased consultations and unilateral proposal of [cryptocurrency integrations](https://www.reddit.com/r/discordapp/comments/qpmhs5/discord_developers_please_do_not_support_nfts/) (which were only dropped after massive backlash); and
  * Deprecating access to read text messages in "servers" with certain exceptions[^12], effectively equating to mandatory rollout of application commands based interaction flow, as well as KYC requirements, for running bots in more than 100 "servers" (which were *not* dropped despite [backlash](https://gist.github.com/Rapptz/4a2f62751b9600a31a0d3c78100287f1)).
* **Closed source**, thus cannot be independently inspected.
* **Lack of control for private data and no guarantee on reliability**, as Discord is centralized, not federated. See [here](../matrix-vs-al/#centralized-platforms).
* **Paywalling richer expression abilities**.[^11] A user with Nitro unlocks certain additional features, mainly related to what can be included in a message, and twice as more guild cap, and twice as long message length limit.

> * **Not intended for serious use**. A developer experience staff at Discord explicitly said, "We are just a casual chatting app." Marketing campaigns of Discord, such as inclusion of gaming related figures, and use of funny memes, seem to agree with that stance.

Reviewer: Discord seems to have moved away from that and tries to appeal to the general population, although it still seems casual. But anyway, this guide mainly addresses people who are either casual or semi-serious (eg. FOSS projects; corporations can look at element.io), so I don't see the point of including that.

Reviewer: fair

| Feature | Discord | Matrix |
| ------- | ------- | ------ |

> | **Registration** | Requires email. Discord may demand your phone number if it detects "suspicious activity." | Depending on homeserver, **email may not be required**. Phone number is usually optional. There is usually no human check after registration. |

Reviewer 2: Homeservers that use SSO only and the correct SSO provider dont need to pay that much for phone number verification.

> | **Registration** | Requires email. Discord may demand your phone number if it detects "suspicious activity." | Depending on homeserver, **email may not be required**. Phone number is usually optional. There is usually no human check after registration. |

Reviewer: Yeah, but remember that this is a *practical* guide, and getting into too much detail is not in the user's benefit. But I digress.

```suggestion
| **Registration** | Requires email. Discord may demand your phone number if it detects "suspicious activity." | Depending on homeserver (especially if you're running your own), **email may be optional**, and phone number is usually optional. There is no *automated* human check after registration. |
```

| Custom emotes in messages | Free users can only use static emotes defined within the "server". Using emojis from outside the "server" and using animated emojis are limited to Nitro users only. | It is possible to insert user-defined static emotes in messages, see [here](../features/#attachments). No support for animated emotes. |
| Reactions | Only emotes (Unicode or custom ones) | Unicode emotes and [text](../features/#reactions). |
| Stickers | Only stickers defined within the "server". | **Unlimited with setup.** See [here](../features/#stickers). |
| Public read receipts | Not supported. | **Supported.** |
| **Direct messages** | Not encrypted. | **Encrypted by default**, including VoIP. |
| Starting a DM | Depending on privacy settings, initiating a DM requires the two users to have established "friendship" or have certain mutual "servers." Users are given the choice to accept, remove, or report a DM (since late 2021). | Initiating a DM solely requires the recipient to accept the request[^3]. Users can leave DMs anytime they wish. |

> | **Group chats** | A channel is associated with a "server." You can only join 100 "servers." | A room is standalone, but can be optionally included and associated with a Space, which is just a room linking to other rooms. You can join **unlimited** amount of rooms. |

Author: It is important as spaces can appear in the room directory like other rooms, and they admit room aliases like other rooms.

> | **Group chats** | A channel is associated with a "server." You can only join 100 "servers." | A room is standalone, but can be optionally included and associated with a Space, which is just a room linking to other rooms. You can join **unlimited** amount of rooms. |

Reviewer: Edited at https://github.com/austinhuang0131/joinmatrix/commit/8a2353353a26e57208e6f9d936bf056a2fdcf63b instead

| VoIP in groups | Supported. | Not supported until early 2022. |
| Organizing chats | "Servers" can be organized into folders, but each "server" can only belong to 1 folder. Channels can only be organized by the "server" owner. | Rooms can be included within an unlimited amount of Spaces. Spaces may also include other Spaces (similar to Discord's channel categories). |
| Group chat privacy | Denying "View Channel History" permission prevents users from reading messages prior to their most recent login. However the "server" owners cannot enjoy that privacy, due to how Discord's permission system works. | You may deny new members from reading messages prior to them being invited / joining. You may also allow or deny guest access (such as [Matrix Static](http://view.matrix.org/)) from reading messages. You may also enable encryption[^4]. |

> | Server-side deletion guarantees | Messages that are removed from Discord are garbage collected from discord.com databases within less than 2 days. | As Matrix follows an event chain model, there is no true deletion. The closest thing available is redaction, which instructs the users and servers to blank the content but not the metadata of the event. Redactions are best-effort. |

Reviewer: And do you trust them in telling the truth?

> Report-delete action actually creates a copy, meaning you have to report it while you are deleting it or before.

This is actually inconsistent, for a while Discord said that it only caches the message indefinitely without actually reporting it (you'd still have to go through the form)

I also personally think this is pointless:

1. Public rooms are free-for-all, in Discord you have modlog bots that effectively prevent your message being scrubbed server-side, and similarly in Matrix a homeserver can refuse to honour a redaction request
2. It is pointless to mention this in private encrypted rooms because a message (content, at least; metadata can be logged in some other way that does not involve the messages themselves), even if retrieved from redaction, cannot be decrypted without the help of the members

> | Server-side deletion guarantees | Messages that are removed from Discord are garbage collected from discord.com databases within less than 2 days. | As Matrix follows an event chain model, there is no true deletion. The closest thing available is redaction, which instructs the users and servers to blank the content but not the metadata of the event. Redactions are best-effort. |

Reviewer 2: Its useful to mention because of what it implies. Discord T&S is completely powerless to act against anything that is deleted without being reported. 

Privacy and Security are both useful things to be informed about. Also yes everyone knows that all deletions are a FFA. Also we should probably mention that its standard practice for matrix homeservers to keep all redactions "pending" in the database for a set amount of time where they will apear to clients to be executed but they wont be executed until the expiration of the hold they are on. This period is commonly is defaulted to i think 7 days.

> | Server-side deletion guarantees | Messages that are removed from Discord are garbage collected from discord.com databases within less than 2 days. | As Matrix follows an event chain model, there is no true deletion. The closest thing available is redaction, which instructs the users and servers to blank the content but not the metadata of the event. Redactions are best-effort. |

Reviewer: Fair enough, but I guess there should be a footnote explaining the FFA fact just so to be fool-proof.

> | Server-side deletion guarantees | Messages that are removed from Discord are garbage collected from discord.com databases within less than 2 days. | As Matrix follows an event chain model, there is no true deletion. The closest thing available is redaction, which instructs the users and servers to blank the content but not the metadata of the event. Redactions are best-effort. |

Reviewer: Re edit: Fair enough, I'll discount the mod bots.

> If my analysis of the matter is correct

How do you know what you see is the truth?

But this is kind of going nowhere so I guess you can keep it as-is, but please do put a footnote just to be fool-proof (well, FUD-proof, to be exact)

| Publicity | Although Discord offers its own "server" discovery feature, the requirements are somewhat arbitrary, so third-party services are often used. Only "server" owners can apply to Discord's own "server" discovery directory. Third party directory services may differ. | Each homeserver has a room directory which anyone in that homeserver may publish to. |
| Invite | Through generating invite links. | Through directly inviting users, or through shareable [addresses](../features/#promotion). |

> | Permissions in group chats | Single-owner, up to 255 roles. How long did it take for you to learn role hierarchy?[^8] A "server" can deleted by its owner only, and that deletion affects everyone. | Up to 2^54 power levels (I think it's -2^53 to 2^53-1, however I highly doubt you will *ever* reach that limit), with minimal permissions. A user acquires a permission if their power level is equal to or higher than the power level required for the specific permission. Rooms are not owned by any user or server, hence cannot forcibly be shut down without coordination. |

Reviewer: > hence cannot forcibly be shut down without coordination

"Usually."

* If there is only 1 admin who kicks everyone then leaves
* If there is only 1 server in the room who decides to do room shutdown

| Bans | Bans are only visible to "server" moderators. One can also see their own ban when they attempt to join a "server", but not the ban reason. | Bans are public to all members, along with the reasons. |
| **Running a bot** | Running a bot in more than 100 "servers" requires proof of identity. Selfbotting is forbidden. | You can run bots on any user accounts[^5] [^6]. Selfbotting is permitted (but be nice). |

> | **Apps to access platform** | You are only allowed to use the official Discord app (including its PTB and Canary variants). Client modifications are forbidden but effectively tolerated. Third-party clients are forbidden but some are also tolerated. | Element is the main app, but [**you're welcomed to use whatever you wish**](../#what-app-should-i-use). You can even make an app yourself[^6]! |

Reviewer: > but some are also tolerated

Source?

Author: In https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=25224151, Jake Henry says:

> We are not banning people for using Ripcord. We are banning people for using our API in ways that our official client doesn't. This is paramount to our spam detection strategy, which is detecting quirks in requests that try and emulate our official client, in order to send spam. There is a very thin line between "scripts meant to try and emulate our client to send spam in an automated fashion" and "third party client" both try and emulate our client, but perhaps for different intent. However, our systems currently treat these as equals. It is for this reason that we have maintained that 3rd party clients are against our ToS - and most warn you before you use them. Given the vanishingly small user-base of 3rd party clients relative to the tremendous amount of spam-bots that constantly are attacking our platform, it's an unfortunate reality that this is bound to happen.
> 
> If you are a real human, and not a spam bot, our general policy is to unban and tell you "hey don't do that again." Which is the outcome that should have (and eventually did) happened here.

Reviewer: > There is a very thin line between [spam tools] and "third party client" both try and emulate our client, but perhaps for different intent. However, our systems currently treat these as equals.

So third-party clients that (try to) reimplement official client functions are practically outlawed? Because it's not possible to fully emulate the official client?

But client mod users usually don't get banned at all (provided that they are not engaging in other activities)

Author: > So third-party clients that (try to) reimplement official client functions are practically outlawed? 

The truth is their antispam has a high false positive due to the nature of the receiver curve (the more true positives, the more false positives), and they cannot reliably distinguish the two.

Reviewer: So the reality is that third-party clients are banned _de facto_ while client mods that rely on the official client are not banned _de facto_ even if they're banned _de jure_, for what reason they ban it is irrelevant (especially in a practical guide)

Author: More like a third party client that implements _**certain**_ (but a constantly changing list of) features or manifests bot-like usage patterns are banned.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| **Apps to access platform** | By ToS, you are only allowed to use the official Discord app (including its PTB and Canary variants). Some modifications are generally tolerated, however certain reimplementations may be forbidden. | Element is the main app, but [**you're welcomed to use whatever you wish**](../#what-app-should-i-use). You can even make an app yourself[^6]! |
```

| **Running a bot** | Running a bot in more than 100 "servers" requires proof of identity. Selfbotting is forbidden. | You can run bots on any user accounts[^5] [^6]. Selfbotting is permitted (but be nice). |
| **Apps to access platform** | By ToS, you are only allowed to use the official Discord app (including its PTB and Canary variants). This is not enforced consistently: some modifications and some third party clients are generally tolerated, while others may be forbidden. Third party clients that do not touch certain user profile related features tend to be not caught. | Element is the main app, but [**you're welcomed to use whatever you wish**](../#what-app-should-i-use). You can even make an app yourself[^6]! |

> | **Network access** | **IPv4 only**. Users and bot developers have raised this issue repeatedly, and staff stated this is not urgent at all, despite the fact that IPv4 addresses have been exhausted worldwide: "We of course care of the future of the platform however ipv4<->ipv6 connectivity is not really going away any time soon with the availability of nat64 - and there are much more important things to work on." | **IPv4&v6 support varies depending on homeserver**. |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| **Network access** | **IPv4 only**. Users and bot developers have raised this issue repeatedly, and staff stated this is not urgent at all, despite the fact that IPv4 addresses have been exhausted worldwide: "We of course care of the future of the platform however ipv4<->ipv6 connectivity is not really going away any time soon with the availability of nat64 - and there are much more important things to work on." | **Most if not all homeservers participating in the public federation have IPv4 connectivity but IPv6 connectivity varies from homeserver to homeserver.**. |
```

Clarified that Homeservers generally speaking must support v4 to federate properly but also are free to support v6 and some do. If you would be v6 only you would limit your self to a large degree due to that matrix is full mesh.

| Invite | Through generating invite links or using an OAuth-based integration. | Through directly inviting users, or through shareable [addresses](../features/#promotion). |
| Permissions in group chats | Single-owner, up to 255 roles. How long did it take for you to learn role hierarchy?[^8] A "server" can only be shut down by its owner, and that affects everyone. Members cannot demote their own permissions. Roles of a member are reset when a member leaves hence do not survive rejoin. | Up to 2^54 power levels (I think it's -2^53 to 2^53-1, however I highly doubt you will *ever* reach that limit), with minimal permissions. A user acquires a permission if their power level is equal to or higher than the power level required for the specific permission. Rooms are not owned by any user or server, hence cannot usually forcibly be shut down without coordination. Members can demote their own permissions. Power levels of members survive leave and rejoin. |

> | Size limits of group chats | 10 in group DMs, several tiers in "servers" ranging from 1000 to 1 million, subject to manual transistion across those tiers.[^15] | No artificial limits, albeit current implementations do not perform well past a few tens of thousands of members. | 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Size limits of group chats | 10 in group DMs, several tiers in "servers" ranging from 1000 to 1 million, subject to manual transition across those tiers.[^15] | No artificial limits, albeit current implementations do not perform well past a few tens of thousands of members. | 
```

Also for Matrix, I think it depends on server count rather than user count?

Author: User count. Guild count is already limited to 100-200/user for human users.

| Bans | Bans are only visible to "server" moderators. One can also see their own ban when they attempt to join a "server", but not the ban reason. | Bans are public to all members, along with the reasons. |

> | Disabled and deleted account handling | Disabling an account is reversible. Messages sent to a "server" from deleted accounts stay unless explicitly removed by somebody else. User name and user settings from deleted accounts are removed. "Servers" owned by accounts shut down by T&S may or may not stay, depending on the exact cause of the shutdown. "Servers" owned by a manually deleted account are automatically shut down. | Disabling an account is usually irreversible. Messages from disabled accounts are not sent to further users and servers. Rooms created by disabled accounts stay. |

Reviewer: > Messages from disabled accounts are not sent to further users and servers.

this is optional, it's a checkbox

| Reactions | Only emotes (Unicode or custom ones) | Unicode emotes and [text](../features/#reactions). |
| Stickers | Only stickers defined within the "server". | **Unlimited with setup.** See [here](../features/#stickers). |
| Public read receipts | Not supported. | **Supported.** |
| **Direct messages** | Not encrypted. | **Encrypted by default**, including VoIP. |
| Starting a DM | Depending on privacy settings, initiating a DM requires the two users to have established "friendship" or have certain mutual "servers." Users are given the choice to accept, remove, or report a DM (since late 2021). | Initiating a DM solely requires the recipient to accept the request[^3]. Users can leave DMs anytime they wish. |
| **Group chats** | A channel is associated with a "server." You can only join 100 "servers," 200 with Nitro. | A room is standalone, but can be optionally included and associated with a Space, which is just a room linking to other rooms. You can join **unlimited** amount of rooms. |

> | VoIP in groups | Supported. | Not supported until early 2022. |

Reviewer 2: Technically supported but only via Jitsi Widgets and Element clients are the only clients that have proper support for this. Expected to be replaced during 2022 with a better system that is a part of the matrix spec. 
```suggestion
| VoIP in groups | Supported. | Limited Support via Integration with Jitsi. Expected to be replaced by a better solution during 2022. |
```

[^2]: For Discord "servers" and for Matrix rooms.

> [^3]: Note that Matrix has no concept of "friends" or "contacts", although the DM list can serve the same purpose. However, user-based contact ignoring exists on Matrix, using two different methods. The former method prevents any and all messages from reaching the recipient, and the latter method hides them client-side by interpreting an ignore list.

Reviewer: Quote and comma: I follow the [MLA style](https://style.mla.org/punctuation-and-quotation-marks/). Also you should specify the methods (especially given that the latter is a lab feature).

Reviewer 2: The messages would reach the recipient even if we are talking encrypted rooms they would just not get the keys.

> [^4]: Enabling encryption is irreversible for security reasons. Note that it is pointless to enable encryption in a public room. Furthermore, enabling encryption means users will not see messages before their invitation (if applicable) or their entry.

Reviewer: pointless

Author: It is important, as allowing reverting E2EE in Matrix would enable downgrade attacks due to how conflict resolution works.

Reviewer: shrug

[^2]: For Discord "servers" and for Matrix rooms.

> [^3]: Note that Matrix has no concept of "friends" or "contacts" per se, although the DM list can serve the same purpose. However, user-based contact ignoring exists on Matrix, using two different methods. The former method prevents any and all messages from reaching the recipient, and the latter method using policy rooms hides them client-side by interpreting an ignore list. The latter method is currently only available in Element as a labs feature.

Reviewer: > The former method prevents any and all messages from reaching the recipient,

Only encrypted ones (key withheld). I can still see unencrypted messages of people who've blocked me.

Author: Ignores are receiver-initiated.

[^8]: May be more accurately described as ban hierarchy, as the order of roles only affect role changes, nick overrides, kicks and bans. Discord's permission system is otherwise "explicit allow wins".

[^9]: Somebody actually tried to report a message after deleting it and they got "no such message in our database" from T&S. Also backed by [Stanislav Vishnevskiy's blog post on infrastructure of Discord](https://blog.discord.com/how-discord-stores-billions-of-messages-7fa6ec7ee4c7#.fdhp3rxlo). However, deletions are basically a free-for-all matter: users (including bots) may decide to keep or repost deleted messages, and there is nothing stopping this.

[^10]: Process detection only exists in the desktop client. Somebody reverse engineered this process detection. Unlike Steam's similar process detection, this detection only sends the successfully detected games, not the list of every process running. Can be opted out by disabling the game activity detection. Science endpoint is said to drop the data server-side when the relevant toggles are disabled, however no one has verified if that toggle actually works. Hence assumed as "cannot be opted out".

> [^11]: Paywalling features related to customisation and expressivity is Discord's core business model, stated repeatedly by themselves and also verified by various third party sources. https://seoaves.com/how-does-discord-make-money-the-discord-business-model/ https://moneymodels.org/business-models/how-does-discord-make-money/

Reviewer: "See here and here" with hyperlinks is better than exposing the link
```suggestion
[^11]: Paywalling features related to customisation and expressivity is Discord's core business model, stated repeatedly by themselves and also verified by various third party sources. See [here])https://seoaves.com/how-does-discord-make-money-the-discord-business-model/) and [here](https://moneymodels.org/business-models/how-does-discord-make-money/).
```

[^12]: The exception is messages that @-mention the bot user can still be seen without the message content event. As many bot developers said, this is still a band-aid and not a useful solution. Direct messages are not affected by message content intent. 

[^13]: Most Matrix servers are known to keep the pre-redaction content of the event for a week, while immediately sending the redaction instruction to their fellow users. Again, redactions are basically a free-for-all matter.

[^14]: More accurately speaking, guilds are mapped to the guild servers in a many-to-one fashion. This can easily be confirmed by "server" outages, which happen when the guild process in the respective server restarts or the guild is being migrated to another server. However, the end users still lack any control on choosing a particular guilds server instance to host a guild.

> [^15]: Discord "servers" have an initial limit of 125000 members. "Server" owners can request this limit to be increased by filing a support ticket, in which case Discord engineering team looks at the activity of the guild and manually migrates it to a guilds server instance with a larger member limit. Known tiers are: 125k, 250k(beyond this tier, brand verification and/or partnering required), 500k, 1M, 1.5M.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[^15]: Discord "servers" have an initial limit of 125000 members. "Server" owners can request this limit to be increased by filing a support ticket, in which case Discord engineering team looks at the activity of the guild and manually migrates it to a guilds server instance with a larger member limit. Known tiers are: 125k, 250k (beyond this tier, brand verification and/or partnering required), 500k, 1M, 1.5M.
```
